[Music]
I was very much struck by how the
translation of the biblical writings
jump started the development of literacy
across the entire world illiteracy was
the norm the pastor's home was the first
school and every morning it would begin
with singing the Christian faith is a
singing religion probably 80 percent of
Scripps memorization today exists only
because of what is sung this is amazing
here we have a Gutenberg Bible printed
on the Press of Johan Gutenberg science
and religion are opposing forces in the
world but historically that has not been
the case now the book is available to
everyone from Shakespeare to modern
education and medicine and science to to
civilization itself it is the most
influential book in all history and
hopefully people can walk away with at
least a sense of that
if you're looking to facilitate people's
ability to make positive changes in
their own life there is nothing you can
do that's more helpful to that than to
make them literate and if you want to
help them understand who they are in the
deepest sense over and above the
superficial attractions of tribalism
let's say you have to educate them
deeply in this historical uh uh realm
that requires the acquisition of
explicit knowledge about the central
nature of the human being and so that
was the proper role of the universities
for years it was as I Envision it our
role was twofold that we were going to
teach a math of the inductive method as
opposed to the deductive method so that
people when they looked at The Human
Experience via art or literature or
history they would look at Exempla and
then they would come to a general
overriding conclusion that took it took
the evidence rather than say I have an
idea and I'm going to cherry pick the
evidence that was one thing we taught
the socratic inductive medicine the
other was we had to give them some kind
of Arsenal or or realm of knowledge or
reference points so that was some of
some of the things that are more
pragmatic since the humanities were able
to do they were able to give a person a
whole reference of knowledge so that
they didn't have to live out and learn
something by wrote or by they had an
example
[Music]
hello everyone I have a guest today that
I've wanted to talk to for a long time
Dr Victor Davis Hansen he is the Martin
and Illy Anderson senior fellow at the
Hoover Institution
with his focus in the classics and
military history he's an accomplished
academic professor and author he's
taught at Stanford Hillsdale College the
U.S Naval Academy at Pepperdine
University his books many of them 26 I
believe include the second world wars
the end of Sparta the soul of battle
Carnage and culture and a case for Trump
in 2019 but I think we'll start today
with a discussion about citizenship I'll
just make a couple of comments you know
one of the things I've noticed over the
last I suppose the span of my life
really is that
during my lifetime the word citizenship
seem or citizen seem to be replaced by
the word consumer which I always thought
was a bad replacement given that citizen
has this you know it's got a stalwart
and traditional and and dignified
connotation that the word consumer seems
to lack entirely well you wrote a whole
book about citizenship recently and so I
thought we might weave our way through
that and you contrast citizens with
pre-citizens the book by the way is
called the dying citizen how Progressive
Elites tribalism and globalism are
destroying the idea of America and you
start that book off well first of all
decrying that that destruction but also
contrasting the modern idea of
citizenship of Citizen with the
pre-modern idea of say uh peasant or or
resident or tribe and so let's delve
into that a little bit
yeah I mean the idea of citizenship's
pretty recent in the long history of
civilization it appeared somewhere
around 700 BC in rural Greece and swept
pretty quickly but and so by the fifth
century there were 1500 city-states and
what it was was the first time that
citizens were self-governing and that
meant that they were they were pretty
clearly defined they made up their own
militias they adjudicated the
circumstances under which they would go
to war they voted for their own
officials they and more importantly they
had property rights they could pass on
property I think that was a catalyst for
citizenship the right of inheritance
that the estate couldn't expropriate or
own property from the individual
and I and then that long Odyssey uh
brought us to of course the founding of
the United States and there were clear
distinctions between a resident that
happened to live in the United States in
a citizen a citizen alone could vote a
citizen alone could hold office a
citizen alone could leave uh the
boundaries and come back into the United
States on his own volition a citizen
alone was eligible for uh Federal
services or in Most states and the
citizen
served in the military I don't think any
of those still apply those distinctions
between a resident and a citizen with
the exception of holding office and
that's under assault I know here in
California people who are not just not
non-citizens but here illegally can vote
say in a Berkeley School Board election
and now there's efforts to make sure
that people can run for office who are
not citizen sit non-citizens serve in
the military non-citizens actually can
go across the border with greater
facility than you or I could probably
and so we are a nation we've never had
this before of 50 million people in the
United States that were born in a
foreign country of different statuses
some were legal residents some are
illegal residents some are citizens some
common are migrants back and forth and
that's the highest in actual numbers and
in percentages of the population and
unfortunately it comes into time when we
the hosts have lost confidence in the
traditional Melting Pot of assimilation
integration in her marriage and so we're
starting to revert to a
pre-civilizational tribalism I think
large swaths of the United States are
tribal now
okay so let's let's let's start
approaching that anthropologically and
psychologically so 600 BC something like
that you seem to get something like a
transformation of the idea of the tribe
which actually wouldn't have been an
idea right A Tribe isn't an idea a tribe
is a natural offshoot of our primate
Heritage that's a good way of thinking
about it and a tribe would have been
something like an extended kin group and
there was that was bound together by our
our our primate social biology somewhat
akin to a chimpanzee troop or maybe a
bonobo troop and then
as we became more capable of abstract
formal form formalization that idea of
or that reality of tribal membership got
transmuted into something that actually
had stable properties and that would be
the idea of a citizen and so you get a
layer of abstraction on top of that that
starts to lay out technically and
explicitly what it means to be the
member of a group and then along with
that you get a set of Rights and
responsibilities that are associated
with that group but also the possibility
of expanded both expanded and limited
membership that's also formalized and so
as as the Greeks did with so many things
they took something that was part and
parcel of our biological proclivity so
that proclivity for kinship and
tribalism and turn it into an explicit
philosophical notion and out of that I
suppose develop both the idea of
intrinsic human rights and human
responsibilities and that was all tied
up in the notion of citizenship and even
now when you hear people talk about
citizenship they concentrate a lot more
about the rights on the right than on
the responsibilities
they do the big breakthrough was that
person replaced their primary allegiance
to either someone that had Blood Ties or
looked like them or the same Locale and
they transferred that to an abstraction
of the state and what that meant was for
the first time there was a an embryonic
sense of meritocracy you know and you
can really see it today I I've traveled
almost I think to every Middle East
Country except Iran and I'm always
curious when I was in Libya or Egypt or
Tunisia why they don't work even given
some countries have enormous natural
resources and I always would hear a
refrain well you know we we hire our
first cousin or we hire our second
cousin that there that there is still a
tribal loyalty and what's tragic about
the United States is that meritocracy
and that multiracial what became a
multi-racial multi-religious
uh body politic was United by a primary
allegiance to the idea of America where
people you know where they enriched
America with their food or their fashion
or their art
other music and that made American
culturally rich but they didn't in Port
Mexican ideas of constitutional
government such as they were or they
didn't bring in Russian ideas of
individual liberty they they didn't
touch the core and that core United us
and now we can see that that's no longer
true that people are re-tribalizing and
they're starting to identify with either
their Ken group or their ethnic group or
their religious group and uh what's
scary now in the United States is that
we've seen when you have a geographical
Force multiplier and we're starting to
see that with red blue migration it's
it's sort of analogous to what happened
in 18 the 1850s where there was a
Mason-Dixon line so to speak of a very
different culture that bifurcated from
the north and if this continues I think
we're going to see a
a
sort of a traditionalist America that
claims that it follows the founding
principles in red states of limited
government less regulation small
Taxation and the idea of a citizen
giving up their primary allegiance to
the state
versus the Blue State model California
Illinois New York in which a a number of
identity politics groups or special
interest groups all Lobby for influence
and you can see what happens in the LA
City Council hot mic scene where all of
these Latino Council people got caught
on a hot mic where they were explicitly
defining the new idea of a citizen and
that was that their primary identity
group was at war with people from Oaxaca
it was at war with blacks it was at war
with gays and they were angry because of
their representation was not
demographically proportional to their
numbers in the population so they said
and I think that was a future for the
country and it's what's going on in
California in the present
[Music]
the current administration's New Year's
goals are to tax spend and turn a blind
eye to inflation if this is at odds with
your goals if you are tired of the
government playing games with your
savings and your retirement plans then
you need to get in touch with the
experts at Birch gold today for over 5
000 years gold has withstood inflation
geopolitical turmoil and stock market
crashes with help from the experts at
Birch gold you can own gold and attack
sheltered retirement account Birch gold
makes it easy to convert an IRA or 401K
into an IRA in Precious Metals just text
Jordan to 989898 to claim your free info
kit on gold and then talk to one of
their precious metals Specialists Birch
gold will hold your hand through the
entire process text Jordan to 989898 and
protect yourself with gold today with an
A plus rating with the Better Business
Bureau thousands of happy customers and
countless 5 Star reviews you can trust
Birch gold to help protect your savings
text Jordan to
989898 today
[Music]
yeah so you worry about uh what what you
might describe as a reversion to this
more implicit tribalism that's
predicated on well it would be
predicated on religious Identity or skin
color or linguistic Identity or perhaps
shared philosophical identity although
that would be rarer and that that's the
counterposition to this more abstractive
notion of citizenship so let's delve
into that for a minute because I think
we could lay forth the proposition that
unless there's a higher order principle
that unites people either
psychologically or socially then they're
disunited and if they're disunited
they're anxious and confused and aimless
and conflict-bladen like the natural
state of human beings in the absence of
a unifying principle isn't peace it's
war and so then we might ask is there a
unifying Transcendent principle that's
valid that isn't just another narrative
you know because the postmodern critique
is that all unifying narratives are what
would you call it expressions of
arbitrary power and dominate nation and
I don't really think that's true I don't
think that's true of Western societies
and the reason I think that's
technically untrue is because there's an
idea in Western society that I think is
fundamentally what's logo spaced it's
partly Greek and it's partly
judeo-christian that the individual is
the proper level of analysis in some
real sense and that the individual has
intrinsic worth and dignity but more but
there's more to it than that is that
it's necessary for the
um for that intrinsic dignity and worth
of the individual
to be recognized and set apart by law in
some sense honored by law because the
individual has something to offer to the
group and that's the uniqueness of their
being let's say and that if you allow
people to be free or encourage their
freedom then they can trade that
uniqueness with everyone else and freely
and that in that trade is to be found
both peace and let's say like and
abundance and I think that principle
isn't merely another narrative I think
that is the predicate both of peace and
of of economic well-being and so but
conservatives and okay okay dude I I
think you comment on all that
or another way of putting it is the
United States was based on an idea of a
quality of opportunity that because
we're not born equal or we have
different
life experiences or we inherit or don't
inherit or we're healthy or we're
long-lived or not
we don't try to even that out in terms
of economic recompense we just let
people
follow their own trajectories and then
we have other methods to appeal to their
magnaminity so the philanthropic the
religious uh the humanism we have all
these ways that if people do better than
other people we allow them to be
creative and to try to bring back give
back to the society or at least use
their talents
even if it's profit-minded to build a
better Bridge or a dam rather than the
alternate which is the strain in western
civilization it starts actually the
Socialist impulse starts with the Greeks
there is a strain of that with the
pythagoreans but the other idea and
that's what we're I think fighting now
is the woke equality of result that
we're going to appoint some platonic
Guardians and give them Untold power and
then their Infinite Wisdom
they're going to do two things they're
going to force people to be equal what
they call Equity and they're never going
to be subject to the consequences of
their own ideology because they they
need special exemptions given their
enormous responsibilities and their
talent and so what we see now is this by
Coastal Elite in the United States
is starting to mandate behaviors and
principles and issues and policies that
they themselves would never follow and
would have no intention of following and
it's based on that
every single person has an innate right
to be the same as another person or was
that Aristotle said once a man in
democracy and he feared this feels that
he's equal in voting with another man
then he feels by extension he should be
equal in all other aspects of his life
and that was what that was the
philosophical worry about democracy that
it was so it always evolved to a more
radical form of equality I think we're
now at the end stage where almost
everybody feels they have a grievance
against the state and therefore they're
they're entitled to compensatory or
Repertory
money or or land uh here in California
when we were discussing reparations
suddenly people were bidding in in the
Oakland City Council and suggesting that
they were owed eight hundred thousand
dollars
uh and they had a grievance apparently
even though they were six Generations
Away From Slavery and maybe four from
uh they were in the fourth generation of
the Civil Rights Movement they had
grievances against people who had never
had slaves in California had for example
had never been a slave state but it was
that mentality
um and you know a lot of people warned
us about this tocqueville said the
problem that we would face in the United
States is that most people innately
would rather be poorer and equal than
all better off but some more better off
than others and he felt that if that
well that's that was that would be a
very dangerous uh development I think
we're pretty much there now
yeah well that's I suppose to some
degree why there's an injunction against
covetness covetousness in the uh in the
Ten Commandments you know that you're
not supposed to covet or envy your your
neighbor's donkey or his wife or his
house and yeah I mean part of the reason
for that is that if no one can have
anything more than anyone else then no
one can have anything at all and that's
generally been the state of humanity for
the longest reaches of human history it
it looks very much like if we're going
to allow a rising tide to raise all
boats we have to allow some people to
rise faster than others in multiple
dimensions and so and I don't see any
way out of that and certainly not the
case that these hypothetically
egalitarian systems of governance like
communism ever produced anything that
had less of a Pareto distribution or an
unequal distribution than capitalist
societies I mean everyone was much
poorer but the rich were still much
richer than everyone else and there's
also something in there you talked about
identity and I've watch this happen on
the
um what would you call it inevitable
consequences of pathological uh thought
front so
the the leftists who are pushing for
equality of outcome
insisted that if there were differences
in socioeconomic outcome that you could
identify by group then that was a prior
evidence of systemic oppression let's
say but they fell
astray of a certain
peculiarity with regards to group
identity which is that group identity is
actually infinitely fragmentable and so
out of the initial identity political
theorists you got the intersectionalists
who made the case that while you were
oppressed let's say if you were Latino
and you were oppressed if you were
female but the joint interaction between
Latino and female made you even more
specially oppressed and then you could
add gay to that or whatever other and so
and what you see happening on multiple
fronts in consequence is that the Litany
of potential ethnic groups increases the
number of them and then the number of
interactions increases and that
increases exponentially as you add more
identity categories and what that
essentially means is that the problem of
computing Equity starts to become
technically impossible because every
single person's identity is so complex
on the intersectional front that there
isn't even a hypothetical way of
deciding whether any given socioeconomic
outcome is Equitable and so when I
walked through that I thought well
Western culture to actually solved that
problem several thousand years ago by
pointing out that the appropriate level
of analysis is the individual because
the individual has a unique identity
that is in some sense a consequence of
older multiplicitous group identities
but singularly
what would you say singularly
representative of each individual and so
then you let individuals compete and
cooperate in a fair market and that's
the best possible way of moving towards
the right balance between equity and
wealth that's what it looks like
I think that's that's right and you can
see that where this leads to it it's
logical that you would end up with a
ward Churchill or Elizabeth Warren that
by needs would fabricate a victimized
identity she was the first quote-unquote
a Native American professor of law at
Harvard on that basis alone and then on
the other realm when you start to
replace class interest or economic
status with race then the left really
hit on something I think it was it was
really Barack Obama in between 2009 and
2016. he took a rather ossified word
diversity and he recalibrated to mean
we're not going to look for victims on
the basis of their income anymore
because that's mutable in fact Marxism
never worked in the United States
because this free market capitalism and
a lot of free land in the 19th century
was always a movement of upward mobility
and therefore you would never have a
continually oppressed class in fact
today people go up and down out of out
and in of the middle and the upper
middle classes so what I think Obama did
was
he redefined race in America is not a
binary between 88 percent white and 12
percent black but he came up with this
word diversity that replaced class
differentiation or class oppressions or
class Grievances and he said it's 30
percent of the population is we're going
to call them non-white and therefore
they're diverse and then where we ended
up it was this ridiculous situation
where
to take a caricature you have Meghan
Markle
The Duchess who was half black
lamenting to Oprah Winfrey who is a
multi-billionaire about their shared
grievances as being non-whites or Lebron
James
complaining and so that was a very
brilliant thing the left did because
once they made race the Arbiter of
Oppression and being the oppressed and
the victimized then class didn't matter
anymore and now we have this Elite who
says that they're not white in a
particular percentage and all of a
sudden we don't really care about the
circumstances of their home their car
their wealth their income it doesn't
matter anymore they're going to be
Perpetual victims on the basis that they
are diverse
and the left really massaged that in
such a way that I don't think anybody
quite knew what was going on until they
sprung it on us well there's a real
there's a real attraction to a kind of
deep narcissism there and I I think I
first encountered that probably at Ivy
League schools in the U.S so I'm a
Canadian and not that familiar with the
more differentiated class structure in
the U.S and so when I went down to teach
at Harvard it was an anthropological
adventure for me as well as a let's call
it a a research-oriented adventure and
an intellectual adventure and uh
I didn't understand as much as I do now
how what dynamic the Ivy League schools
played in the U.S in terms of of
ensuring upward mobility and I knew at
Harvard I believe it was when I was
there in the 90s the estimate was that
40 percent of Harvard undergraduates
would be billionaires by the age of 40
and that was you know that was 30 years
ago and so that was quite a substantial
amount of money then and the whole point
is is that if you got into an Ivy League
school
as soon as you got in you were basically
a member of the one percent now you
might have been a junior member but you
were definitely a member and I thought
that was perfectly fine because in some
sense because the Ivy Leagues did a damn
fine job of merit-based uh selection now
it wasn't perfect there were Legacy
students for example and you know there
was a bit of play in the system there
but fundamentally Harvard and the other
Ivy Leagues had transformed themselves
into from old boys clubs in the 1960s
into highly Elite intellectual
institutions by the 1990s but then what
I saw too and this was so interesting
was that being junior members of the one
percent
with you know almost certain Hallmark of
long-term success as a consequence of
Ivy League admission wasn't enough for
many students and their idiot professors
they had to have the label of oppressed
uh working for them too so you had these
this strange spectacle as far as I was
concerned of these unbelievably
fortunate ivy league students who were
offered an opportunity that well is it
really unparalleled in human history not
only
benefiting as a consequence of being the
beneficiaries of this amazing system but
simultaneously claiming the status of
the poor and oppressed and claiming at
the same time to be avatars and
representatives of that oppressed group
and I thought Jesus you guys like being
rich and Powerful in junior form isn't
enough for you you have to have all the
virtues of the Rich and all the
Privileges and opportunities and you
have to have all the virtues of the poor
and oppressed at the same time it's like
that just seems to me to be a bit much
and you see that reflected in the people
that you're describing who have these
this unbelievable wealth and opportunity
and who yet put themselves forward as
you know canonical victims of an
oppressive system
I I think we're going to see in our
lifetime though the end of the ivy
league Stanford Berkeley cattle brand as
a mark of entree into the
the one percent and by that
we're no longer into purport when we had
proportional representation in
Admissions and hiring that was sort of
the the modus operandi until George
Floyd So 12 of the student bodies were
African-American even if they had on an
average 200 points less than Asian
students on the s.a.t or we had about 65
percent white Asians were of course
treated like Jews in the 1930s they were
discriminated against so their numbers
would only be about 20 percent or
otherwise they would have been 40 and
Latinos are about 12 but after George
Floyd we went into a radical
compensatory or Repertory admission so
Stanford where I worked just announced
their new class profile it's 23 percent
White
and out of that 55 54 are women so and
you you have about 12 percent white
males and the the SAT to accommodate
that became optional rather than
mandatory but here was what was
interesting about some of the statistics
they would not allow anybody to have
information about how many students that
were admitted this year actually took
the optional sat they wouldn't release
that but they did for some reason
release the fact I think they were proud
of it that of those very rare students I
think it's 0.1 or something who get a
perfect score which is almost impossible
to do on the SAT in math and in
the analysis and of course in English
and composition
they rejected 70 percent of them 70 wow
and so what we're what we're seeing you
can see it in free fall because what's
happening when you bring a lot of
students that were not competitive
through K-12 and almost instantly and
arbitrarily you declare that they are
ivy league students then they go into
these classes and then the professors
are in this dilemma because they either
have to do one of two things one of
three things they either have to change
radically the curriculum
to facilitate people that were not
properly prepared and they're doing that
some or they're going to have to
radically change the grading system
uh so that a person who gets would have
gotten a d or C gets a b or a and
they're doing that in some cases or a
few feel that they are going to die on
the altar of standards and they're
starting to grade according to what
people actually earn but when we have 15
000 administrators or administrative
staff and sixteen thousand students you
can see that we've got kind of a
commissar system and many of these are
these new diversity Equity inclusions
ours and so then if a faculty member
does cling to standards cling I guess is
a good word then he has a systemic
racist pedigree because he's
deliberately giving grades lower in this
narrative to people of color and the
result how it all works out I think in
the end is that Silicon Valley and all
these people privately when you talk to
them they're they're either preferring
say a coder from Georgia Tech than from
Stanford or themselves
they're actually giving tests to people
stealthily so if you want to go to work
at Google or you want to go at a startup
and you come with the Stanford
bachelor's degree that no longer is
entree anymore because they know that
the degree is not competitive with Cal
State San Luis Obispo or much left
Hillsdale College and so what they're
doing is they're they're offering tests
themselves or I should say requiring it
and so I think in a very brief Yale let
in 50 percent of its student body was
white I think it was 55 percent
females so about 25 percent was white
male of that campus and so they've
deliberately taken a whole demographic
and when you I think you wisely pointed
out
legacies and athletes so out of that
small reduced demographic or many or if
not the majority of legacies so what
we've done now in the space of three
years is pretty much disenfranchised the
white working class male who had a
chance to go to these Blue Chip
universities on the basis of merocratic
s.a.t scores or gpas and they're they're
no longer on campus anymore they've
disappeared in the space of there's no
room for them given the demands on this
identity profile so so we could def
let's let's let's talk technically for a
minute
um so that everybody can understand what
these selection criteria actually means
so
you could Define a meritocratic
selection process technically you could
say imagine you have an outcome so you
need an outcome first which might be job
performance or net lifetime productivity
something like that and you can very
much argue about what the outcome
variable should be but it's generally
associated with something like economic
productivity and having made that
measure that might be income uh might be
a number of people you employ in your
lifetime might be number of businesses
that you generate might be number of
creative Enterprises that you engage in
there's a variety of different measures
of say lifetime productive and creative
output and then you could say that you
use a meritocratic selection process if
you lose a statistical procedure that
has been linked to that outcome measure
and so you might say for example are
there things we can measure that predict
lifetime creative or productive capacity
and the answer is well yes we actually
know what they are so one of them is
General cognitive ability which is often
assessed with IQ tests or SATs or mcouts
or Gres standardized tests and the other
is personality with a with a a secondary
uh what would you say contributor of
interest and so people who are
productive have high General cognitive
ability which can be assessed quite
rapidly they tend to be conscientious
which is a personality trait and that
makes them good managers and
administrators or they tend to be high
in openness and that makes them creative
entrepreneurs and
it also helps to some degree to be
somewhat free of negative emotion and
those are basically the category of
predictors on the interest front you
have interest in people versus interest
in things and the interesting things
types tend to be more frequently male
and they tend to pursue the science
technology engineering and Mathematics
streams and so we actually know how to
select people on the basis of Merit we
do General cognitive ability testing and
personality and interest and you can you
can provide a very uh economically
valuable service to each individual and
to the state at large by selecting
according to those criteria because you
then select people who can benefit most
radically from being put with their
peers and from education and the data on
this are crystal clear
now the alternative I've talked to
people like Adrian Wooldridge about this
and you touch on it as well in your book
on citizenship you might say well what's
the alternative to meritocracy and
wooldridge's hypothesis was that in the
absence of a technical meritocracy you
reverted to Dynasty so it's aristocratic
transmission of status or nepotism which
you talked about already in relationship
to kinship and so as soon as you
abandoned the Merit principle you open
up the grounds in all likelihood to all
sorts of corrupt admission processes and
so the universities are going to be
wrestling without they already are a
because one of the ways they
discriminate against Asians which is
everyone's loss right to not to not
maximize our exploitation of the
productive and competent Asians let's
say the way they discriminate against
them is by deeming certain stereotypical
Asian personality traits as not
appropriate on the personality front
and so and they do that to gerrymander
the admission criteria's all criteria on
the basis of race and and I think
they've even in the last two years of
all would be on that the old plaint
complaint against them was in this
tryout of the emissions profile
standardized test scores
GPA and what they called
community service or personality
whatever we want to talk about it was
amorphous
so they would go after Asian students at
that with that and they'd say Well
they're robotic or yeah they have
they're one-dimensional okay but now
they've gotten rid of uh all
standardized tests and they don't even
make any for they don't need to do that
anymore so basically they've upped the
Asia they have the Asian admissions
between 20 and 25 on the principle that
they're about 12 percent of the
population they won't sue if they're 20
to 25 and they can exclude them any way
they want now because there is no sat
and there's and what the next Horizon is
as you saw at the
the
I think in Cornell right now there's a
big movement to abolish grades and at
the new school everybody in New York
everybody wants to have an A an
automatically at the new school and
we're going to we're going to see that
because what's happening on these Ivy
Leagues very rapidly it's almost amazing
at at kind of the speed of light that
graduation and admission are now
synonymous in other words once you're
admitted and that was true to some
extent in the past when the we're kind
of reverting back to this what you
mentioned the old boy gentleman C Ivy
League of the 40s or 19th century and
now we're saying if you get into Harvard
or Yale or Stanford and you can't do the
work you have a right to graduate
doesn't matter and we will make the
necessary adjustments you have to get
something for your three hundred
thousand dollars in tuition
and so why not go so so you can think
about it think about it this way you can
think about it biologically like I tend
to think that uh it's a funny metaphor
but I tend to think of whale carcass and
here's why so it takes a whale a long
time to build up a whole whale body and
then if it washes up on the beach
there's plenty for everyone to eat for a
while
and so you see this happening in all
sorts of big organizations is that they
build a brand in the ivy League's
definitely built a brand in the U.S and
that brand has tremendous value for a
long time because the ivy league
admission standards were so high
you can be virtually certain that If you
hired a graduate they were going to be
statistically likely to be top
performers and that was all a
consequence of the admissions the
stringency of admissions policy very
little a consequence of the quality of
Education by the way it was almost all
and all the Business Schools know this
too they know perfectly well that a huge
proportion of the value they offer
prospective employers is a 99th
percentile score on the MCAT at
admission for their MBA students they
bloody well know that I've talked to
dozens of them and so for a long time
because the IVs were so meritocratic
they could justify what they were
charging and they could justify their
their astringent selection because there
was an immense demand for their
graduates especially on the financial
Industries front right most of the kids
that I taught at Harvard strangely
enough went off to pursue careers in
finance which I thought was kind of a
shame you know because Harvard wasn't
producing many scientists for example
but whatever their cargo cognitive
capacity and their work ethic were
highly valued by potential employers
well so now you have a pool there that's
basically a brand right and it's value
for the taking and so because the IVs
have generated this uh reputation of
high quality that can be exploited and
what's happening right now is a huge
invasion of parasitical exploiters and a
huge portion of those are the
administrators you said what there's 15
000 administrators at Stanford for
sixteen thousand students yes that's
hilarious that's hilarious there's no
way that can last man so no I mean it's
I mean it's very similar to the Russian
army uh
and it's disastrous year in 1940 latter
part of 41 when we had they had so many
commissars that were overseeing military
operations that had no intrinsic worth
other than to impede and supposedly uh
make sure that everybody was a proper
Marxist lineness that the German Army
almost got to Moscow and then of course
Stalin stopped it
in extremists he said you know what
we're going to start getting people like
konyev and zhukov and go back to a merit
system and what's and what's scats out
about the university they're adopting a
almost something like the commissar
system where we have these intrusive and
here in the in California almost every
University
uh has a diversity oath where a faculty
member has to state explicitly what they
have done and what they will do to
encourage
diversity Equity inclusion and every
candidate
has to make a statement about what they
have done in the past and to show their
commitment kind of like the loyal Leos
as you remember in the United States in
the 50s and what it's very this uh
destruction of meritocracy is taking on
all of the the aspects and the past that
were failed so we have a comasar system
that failed we had the Loyalty oath that
was that was you know it was a war it
was a antithetical to meritocracy and
then by getting into these on the basis
of race it's and then not having to be
subject to merocratic Performance
standards it's kind of like the British
Army in the 19th century or late
especially the late 18th century where
you could buy a captain and see in fact
right to be an officer you had to put up
money and the I the irony was one of the
reasons of the
startling success of the Napoleonic
system was that After the Revolution
they did have a bureaucratic standard
for officer Corps and the marshals of
France
for were not all aristocratic they were
merit-based and the French army ran wild
for 15 years on that basis until it was
exhausted but the point I'm getting out
is if if you thought
you couldn't come up with a better
system if you planned for years how to
destroy this Ivy League
brand than uh destroying
standardized tests
admitting people that could not take the
test and perform at a level that would
that would be easy I guess you would say
admissible at almost anywhere else where
else I taught at Cal State Fresno and
and Cal State Fresno for 20 years I I
taught their those standards at that
time are that I was there were the
admission standards are more rigorous
than the ivy league now everybody had to
take the s.a.t you don't have to do that
anymore and we never had people we it
was it was
politically correct but we never had
people looking over our shoulder we
never had students that would report us
for uh on toward language or on woke
language or we never had a Dean call us
up and said you're late on your your
diversity statement and so yeah it is
inviting a level of corruption that's
the corruption of this system is just
because we have these people
who are writing these statements and
I've seen them and I mean it's it's
tragic it's tragic if not pathetic where
they're saying and I and when I was
eight years old I sat on a bus with
people who weren't white or on or on the
other hand I was 15 years old somebody
called me a name and ever since I've
been cognizant of the racist nature of
America and nothing none of this has
anything to do with being able to teach
a classical language or build a bridge
or design a coding system and it's it's
going to have consequences if it hasn't
already I think it already has
we'll be back in one moment first we
wanted to give you a sneak peek at
Jordan's new series Exodus
so the Hebrews created history as we
know it
you don't get away with anything and so
you might think you can bend the fabric
of reality and that you can treat people
instrumentally and that you can bow to
the Tyrant and violate your conscience
without cost you will pay the piper it's
going to call you out of that slavery
into Freedom even if that pulls you into
the desert
and we're going to see that there's
something else going on here that is far
more Cosmic and deeper than what you can
imagine the highest
[Music]
Spirit to which we're beholden is
presented precisely as that spirit that
allies itself with the cause of Freedom
against tyranny I want villains to get
punished but do you want the villains to
learn before they have to pay the
ultimate price that's such a Christian
question
well I know that in the ucal system that
75 of applicants for junior faculty
positions
have their applications rejected on the
basis of inadequate Dei statements
before their research dossiers are
evaluated and so it's well here here I
guess is the optimistic side so this
tell me what you think about this so I'm
starting I'm involved in two new
University Enterprises one's at Ralston
College in Savannah we're trying to
build a Humanities research or
Humanities Institute there and we had
our first class this year and that went
extremely well very very carefully
selected students we had an applicant
pool of a thousand so that we could
choose 25 students and we we screened
them in every possible Manner and had a
bang-up class and so that's sort of a
bricks and mortar institution and we'll
see how that goes because that's
complicated but I'm going to start an
academy my daughter's working on this in
November we've got about 30 professors
on board now called the Peterson Academy
and we hope to drive down the cost of a
bachelor's degree we'll start with the
humanities and the social sciences to
four thousand dollars in total now it's
hard to replicate the social element of
University and that's a huge part of the
university is the new peer group and the
people you meet and all of that and the
apprenticeship element it's hard to
virtualize that but when I hear the
sorts of things that you're talking
about then what leaps to my mind in in
some part is Market opportunity because
the fact that students are now paying an
insane amount of money hundreds of
thousands of dollars to go to an Ivy
League Institute that is simultaneously
failing to educate them siphoning their
future earnings into the pockets of
greedy administrators and ever more of
them and sabotaging their own brand
simultaneously it just looks to me like
that is not a sustainable model and you
said you know that you believe that the
the larger companies for example Google
and and other companies that are
actually concerned with performance
still are going to stop regarding an Ivy
League degree as a brand of capability
and so that means it'll you know over a
10-year period or 15-year period they're
going to Scuttle their own economic
model maybe there's also I think there's
opportunities for new education I think
there is I agree I agree with you
entirely there's 650 000 fewer students
in America than last year and about two
two million fewer than 10 years ago
and I mean they say it's demographic but
it's not demographic because the country
increases by about 2 million people per
year and what's happening is uh
especially I think with the zoom uh
phenomenon during the coveted lockdowns
we're getting people like what you and I
are doing or what your podcast or the
Prager University that offers an
alternative
for auto die docs and people who want
continuing education and then we're
getting a big much greater emphasis on
vocational education is yeah when the
lockdown happened we weren't saved by
sociology Majors that were you know take
six units over eight years with you know
sixty thousand dollars in student loans
we needed skilled carpenters and
plumbers and electricians and roofers
and they pay and real dollars are making
more than ever so we're getting a larger
group of people who say I don't want to
be encumbered by these student loans and
I'm going to have a vocational and then
as you say the third alternative are
these these schools a college like
Hillsdale traditionally had about a
thousand students I think it's up to
sixteen hundred and their dilemma right
now as I understand it and I teach there
a couple of weeks every year for the
last 20 years is they are being flooded
by applicants that have not gotten into
Harvard or Yale or Princeton or Stanford
and they require
sat they had already sort of been in
terms of academic rigor or admissions
rigor comparable to Oberlin or Williams
or Amherst but now they've got a real
dilemma because they have this
traditionalist I think quite
deservedly so this idea that they teach
the whole person so if you go to
Hillsdale College you learn how to shoot
and study the Second Amendment you and
lift weights up you lift weights
absolutely it's a it's a hundred percent
360 degree 24 7 citizenship idea but
when you bring all of these people in
that are now looking at a Hillsdale
because it is merocratic and because it
has high standards but many of them are
are not in any way conservative and so
what do you do if you're Hillsdale when
you've I think they have I think they
are interviewing them and you you
mentioned that's why I thought it was
fascinating that you're interviewing
your applicants they're interviewing 95
of the people that are applying and they
have to now
they enforce quite rigorously at
Hillsdale and you know we're also in
discussion with Hillsdale with regard to
potential accreditation for these online
courses because I really like the
Hillsdale model and you know here here's
something to think about too on the on
the technology front so you know I
learned I spent a lot of time analyzing
the relationship between psychological
testing and and uh productivity and
creativity across the lifespan and so I
know a fair bit about that I suppose and
one of the things I did learn was that
part of the reason the universities have
their degrees are valuable is because
they they were very careful in terms of
meritocratic admission and they also
have a hammerlock on accreditation and
so once you have an MBA obviously you're
accredited as an MBA graduate from a
given school and that means you had a
certain peer Network and a certain level
of intellectual proficiency even to get
into the program
a certain degree of conscientiousness to
rigorously pursue the program and pass
and pass it so the value in the
universities in large part is is nested
inside the accreditation now you could
imagine and I don't think this is
technically impossible you could imagine
a system of blockchained accrediting
tests that would be freely available to
people you know I I would do this on a
for-profit basis but so that if you
wanted to claim Bachelor of Arts
equivalents with regards to your
knowledge of the humanities that you
could take a set of objective tests that
couldn't be mucked about with by
administrators and gain your proxy by
that manner so imagine this it's it's an
Enterprise that I've envisioned and
we're pursuing at the moment
imagine I could gain a um uh produce a
data set of ten thousand multiple choice
questions say in American history
you could do that by buying multiple
choice tests from high school and
University professors all across the
country okay now we'd have to administer
them to several thousand people and then
we could analyze each question with
regards to its accuracy as a predictor
of general knowledge domain you can do
that you can rank order them then
imagine you have a program that can
randomly pick equivalent level of
difficulty questions from that whole set
of ten thousand you could set up a
system that could produce
random tests so they couldn't exactly be
faked or cheated easily and you could
rank order people in terms of their
knowledge domains with regards to those
tests and you could blockchain it so it
would be completely impenetrable to
administrative interference and you
could steal the accreditation away from
the universities and I think that's
that's I can't see any reason at all
that that's not technically possible but
that that's been raised before in the
United States and that's the third rail
as far as universities are concerned
because I think they suspect
that given the state of education today
higher education that a person's enter
entering SAT score may be static or
actually go down after four years right
and that the idea that everybody would
take an SAT as an exit exam and it's
it's quite logical because remember what
they said about the sat in the 50s and
60s this was a merocratic
device so that people of different
backgrounds economically deprived or
racially and they didn't go to
competitive schools they wouldn't be
punished so even though they got they
got A's Harvard would say well you got
A's from Fresno but it's not the same as
Saint Paul's and then they answered back
and said but we took the s.a.t test and
this student did as well and but when
you you get rid of all of that and you
say okay
you you introduced the s.a.t because you
said that there were different levels of
Prior education in high schools we want
to reintroduce it on the back end
because we feel that there's different
levels of instruction
quality at universities so just as you
suspected high schools were upon even
quality we now suspect that colleges I.E
Stanford Harvard Yale are of uneven
quality and we can't the ba would mean
nothing just like you said the GPA was
mean nothing unless it was coupled with
its SAT score so to get a ba everybody
has to take the test that you outlined
whether you went to school or not and
another thing you talked about
accreditation if we could just give
every student graduating in the United
States the choice you can go through the
school of education and that's really
the Catalyst for wokeness because it it
trains all of our K-12 Pub or yeah yeah
but you have the alternative of going
and get a master's degree for one year
in an academic subject in chemistry
biology English I think the vast
majority of Bas would prefer to go get a
master's degree in an academic subject
and I think let's talk about that let's
talk about that for a minute so and I've
talked to Larry Arn about this who's the
president of Hillsdale so
um from what I understand at the moment
about 50 percent of American state
budgets are dedicated to education
broadly speaking so that's an awful lot
of money now interestingly enough and
let's say pathologically enough the
faculties of Education have a hammerlock
on teacher accreditation and that
strikes me as absolutely Preposterous
it's it's it's a form of Monopoly that's
that and there's no excuse whatsoever
for it now I've watched faculties of
education for 60 years and they are not
a credible the faculties of Education
are not credible academic institutions
by and large they have been responsible
for some of the worst frauds ever
perpetrated on the buying public so
whole word reading is a good example of
that the whole bloody self-esteem
movement which was a complete
catastrophe
um the idea of of different learning
styles the idea of multiple
intelligences Etc we can lay it out all
at the foot of the faculties of
education and generally they attract
pretty damn bad students and there's no
evidence whatsoever that their so-called
education training produces better
teachers they have been 100 percent not
only derelict in their duties for like
60 years but they've actually been
what they've done has been antithetical
to the general research tradition very
very low quality research most of it
irreproducible most of it based on idiot
ideology and definitely not in the
public interest so here's an idea how
about every governor in the United
States just scraps the requirement to
have a teaching certificate to be able
to teach you wouldn't even need a
master's degree could you could say we
will open up the teaching profession to
anybody who graduated in the top 20
percent of their class
and then poof you don't have faculties
of Education anymore and you don't have
these institutions like if you think
about the idea of the Long March through
the institutions the place where that's
being focused most intently and with
most uh efficiency with regards to the
propagation of woke ideology is
definitely through the faculties of
education and the only reason they have
a single cent of dollar value is because
they have a monopolistic Hammer lock on
teacher certification and that should be
scrap there's a teacher shortage in the
U.S anyways and there's no bloody
evidence at all that the faculties of
Education have produced teachers who
know how to teach
we have this orwellian system in the
United States in which you can be 18
years old in May in a high school
graduating and your teacher has to have
a credential and then over the summer
you will enroll for the fall in a
community college supposedly at a higher
level of instruction and the Community
College teacher does not need a
credential they need to master rate in
some cases they can get exemptions so
there's no logic to it other than than
the the self-interest of the teachers
union but I guess what I'm getting at is
that one of whether it was the covet
lockdown or the George Floyd
ignition of the inter or the
acceleration of the woke movement we're
in really revolutionary times as far as
higher education and the economy I don't
think is given the smaller pool of
applicants and people not choosing Go to
con there's no there's no economic
rationale to support these universities
and their present course and I think
there's going to be a radical change
radical change I used to talk to people
in Silicon Valley and they'd say Victor
we know that Stanford doesn't teach very
well but they do one they do one
Priceless bit of research for us when we
hire a Stanford Graduate we know that
they had to be very very bright on test
scores and GPA and yeah and now if you
take that away they have no reason to to
tap their graduates since they're not
going to learn very much and their
admissions are no longer merocratic and
so I I don't know yeah well that's and
then the other thing that they sold was
they they sold one they said to the
employer we will train people and you
will like them but even if we don't we
were so stringent and careful in our
admissions you're going to get somebody
that's naturally talented but then they
also with a wink and a nod so said this
to the parent
and we're going to get the seons
and the children of the elite and we're
going to have them all here and so you
mentioned the social interaction of a
campus experience
yeah but they can't even offer that
anymore because if
you were making your criteria based on
gender and race and sexual orientation
and not Merit
for whatever reason then the chances are
that people are not going to at Harvard
or Yale or Princeton have a roommate
whose father had a corporation that he
wanted to work in or a coder all of
those ties that they with the wink and
an odd sell the parent because they're
not they're not even
a Clearinghouse for the elite anymore
where they make these relationships that
last throughout their entire life to
their own right benefit and Advantage
they can't even sell that so in a very
you know
just disinterested fashion I don't see
what they have to offer anymore to
anybody well let's I don't really agree
what they let's let's pursue that a
little bit farther because there's other
points of failure on the University
front that we could concentrate on too
so as I progressed through the ranks at
Harvard and then at the University of
Toronto I also watched the
multiplication of adjunct faculty and so
just so everyone who's listening knows
most departments abetted by their
administrators but also pursuing a very
narrow and foolish self-interest have
farmed out a lot of their teaching to
so-called adjuncts and so at some places
that's 50 percent of the teaching
population so now if you're a full
professor at a heavy duty research
institution you have to conduct research
so you need a lab you have to have
graduate students who are pursuing
original research and you have to teach
you have to do a certain amount of
administrative work and you're evaluated
on the basis of your research your
teaching and your administrator of work
basically in that order now if you are a
full Professor you're in the 10-year
stream and you'll be guaranteed a
certain degree of job security after
putting in your apprenticeship but if
you're an Adjunct professor so that's a
part-time professor and that's 50
percent of the professors now you don't
have a research Enterprise you don't
have any graduate students you don't
have a permanent offense you don't get
paid anything you get just paid an
absolute pittance nowhere near enough to
live on
you and you do 50 of the teaching at the
universities now this is very convenient
for the administrators because the
adjunct faculty have zero political
power like zero or less than zero even
and they can be fired or dealt with in
any manner whatsoever at a moment's
notice with no problem and uh
as there are more and more adjuncts
there are fewer and fewer full-time
faculty and so not only are the
universities failing to assess the
students properly and then group them
together in peer groups that would be of
some economic utility across time and
elevating the tuition fees completely
Beyond
comprehension at the same time they're
also radically decreasing the quality
and the influence of the professoriate
at precisely the same time as well as
not hiring enough of them because
administrators have multiplied like
rabbits and faculty numbers have
remained relatively constant so they're
whittling away the quality of the
students on the one hand as fast as they
possibly can but they're doing exactly
the same thing to The Faculty on at
least two fronts the Dei front plus the
adjunct faculty front and you know I
complained about this at the University
of Toronto for years I used to tell my
colleagues it's like why don't we
require that the administration set a
cap to adjuncts like 20 percent of the
faculty force them to hire more
full-time faculty equivalents because
that's who should be hired to serve the
students properly and uh the response
from my colleagues was always something
like well you know it's pretty
convenient for us to have these adjuncts
pick up the excess teaching load we
don't want to put too much pressure on
the administration I thought that's fine
guys that's a hell of a good long-term
strategies like good luck with that over
20 years and so here we are now the
universities are making I would say 10
fatal errors on the business front not
just one they're just there's so many
errors that it's almost a it's a it's a
miracle of incompetence and I do think
it's going to produce a precipitous
collapse I do too and I think just in
conclusion that this is all done by
egalitarians these are people who are
very critical of Walmart and the
gradations in Pay but in fact there's
far greater degrees of inequality and
exploitation in the University by
so-called liberal people than there are
in the in the American workplace that's
what's so ironic about it and I I'm
speaking as a person who
was farming and then was a as an adjunct
faculty for for two years and suddenly
they made me a tenure track professor
and I just noticed I I was teaching the
same teaching load but I made three
times four times the amount of money and
I had benefits and all of a sudden I was
allowed to use the Xerox machine which I
hadn't been allowed to before and all of
a sudden I hadn't changed in anything
but um I
I for the rest of my teaching career I
was very
uh sympathetic to these people who lived
in their cars and they went from one
Community College to State College and
they were exploited and this was all
done by very very left-wing enlightened
people so to speak and that's another
story well you said so many things wrong
you said something very interesting
there like and I just want to call this
out
so you just said that after you were
promoted from like peasant Adjunct
professor living in your car so to speak
to you know reasonable 10-year stream
faculty member you got to use the
photocopy machine so this is the level
of petty tyranny that these people
um what would you say encounter in the
University system you're an adjunct
faculty you're so far down the bloody
social totem pole that it's almost
incomprehensible and for someone to
implement a rule like just imagine the
mindset that it requires to implement a
rule which is well our adjunct faculty
are of so of so little use that it's
perfectly reasonable for the
administrators to forbid them from using
the photocopier because you know how
often people just do that for fun they
wouldn't be photocopying like handouts
for their students or anything like that
they'd just be sitting in their I don't
know what playing with the photocopy
machine which is exactly what adjuncts
do if you don't supervise them 100 of
the time and that's a good snapshot of
exactly how universities it is treat
their adjunct faculty man it's it is
beyond pathetic and the fact that it is
these hypothetical egalitarians doing it
indicates to me that what we're seeing
is much more a war on the idea of
competence and quality itself than it is
any push forward for some hypothetical
bloody egalitarian Utopia it's like
we'll destroy the universities in the
name of egalitarianism and and the
universities are participating on mass
in their own destruction you know it's
it's hard not to sit outside and think
you people so to speak you're going to
get exactly what you're aiming at and
isn't that going to be something
yeah I think not that they were I mean I
was a big at a point in my life I
started a Classical Languages program at
a state college for mostly minority
students and I felt that it was it gave
an enormous advantage to people who had
been disadvantaged to master languages
archeology History Literature but I
don't that was a different era and I
don't I can't see that the university is
a positive force in society anymore it's
pathological almost every bad idea
that is reified the United States has
its origins in the University whether
it's critical legal Theory or critical
race Theory
or critical penal Theory or you name it
it came
it came from University I was watching a
a clip of a break uh Smash and grab in
San Francisco was on YouTube yeah yeah
and I and I remember a conversation I
had with a professor
20 years ago when he was trying to
explain critical legal Theory and he
said you know what we're going to change
the legal system because the only reason
it's against the law to take a candy bar
out of a store is because rich white
male heterosexual Christians don't need
to steal candy bars so they made a law
and I said no no no no
theft is innate as a as innate to the
human species that's pathological you
can't have a civilization with theft of
any sort
and but that idea that was common has
filtered down to the street yeah and
that's why the universities are
they're a drag on the economy they're a
drag on the culture their drag on the
the collective morality and they either
have to be radically changed or
destroyed those ideas are so
pathological that only a half-rate
intellectual could possibly believe them
so I studied the development of
anti-social behavior in children
criminal Behavior a for a long time and
so one of the things we found so
anti-social behavior is extremely stable
and once it's
um manifested say it's very very
difficult to do anything about it to
ameliorate it there's there's virtually
no evidence on the psychological front
of any successful programs in
relationship to the amelioration of
anti-social personality and so my
research team I didn't run it but it was
a research team I was associated with at
Mcgill and at the University of Montreal
kept pushing back into childhood
development to find the origins of
anti-social Behavior because you see
childhood conduct disorder in children
as a precursor to adult criminality and
we could push it back we being the
broader research community two years of
age
so at two years of age there's a subset
of children there are almost all male
about five percent of males who are
temperamentally quite predatory in their
aggression and so they kick hit bite and
steal
and if you group kids together in age
matched groups the most violent
offenders are two years old and the
violent two-year-olds are a subset of
the two-year-olds and so it you see that
kind of an adult life because about one
percent of the criminals are responsible
for 65 percent of the crimes typical
Pareto distribution but you do have a
subset of kids who will use predatory
aggression as their primary mode of
adaptation now it turns out that the
vast majority of those two-year-olds are
socialized by the age of four
but some of them aren't
and the ones that aren't get rejected by
their peers because who the hell wants
to play with someone who kicks hits
bites and Steals and then maybe also has
Tantrums if they don't get their way
that doesn't make you popular it doesn't
give you friends and so what happens to
those kids is that they fall farther and
farther behind in their Social
Development because they don't get into
the peer networks and they retain their
primordial predatory aggression as their
Central means of adaptation and so the
idea that theft and criminality are a
secondary consequence of a pathological
social system seems to be well I imagine
there are cases where that's true but
fundamentally it seems to be flawed
right there is a proclivity to predatory
aggression that's part and parcel of the
panoply of human possibility and most
people are socialized out of that so you
know the reverse is a kind of bizarre
resilianism right that proclaims that
every single human being is innately
good and it's only the corrupt social
system that introduces any pathology
into into reality at all and that you
know and only an idiot French
intellectual could believe that and
although they're American acolytes
I think what's worrisome about all of
what we're talking about is that it's
not abstract it has real consequences
that filter down and by that I mean it's
so ubiquitous the U.S military now
uh has lowered physical standards in
combat and special forces units to
accommodate women that have innately on
average not in every case but less
physical rigor and strength and they
feel there will be no downside they have
spent about five million hours going
through the ranks
collectively to search out uh what Mark
milley and Lloyd Allston and their
Congressional testimonies characterizes
white rage and white supremacy and white
privilege and the funny thing about it
is they have not met their recruitment
standards suddenly none of the three
branches and they haven't met there are
the academies have not met their
enrollment Targets this year and the
reason probably and there's no
scientific data but I think most people
agree is that for one reason or another
the military almost like the British who
relied on the gurkhas or the Indian army
relied on Sikhs You could argue that the
U.S army relied on Rural Americans
mostly white males and south of the
makes in Dixon line in fact if you look
at the fatality records in Iraq and
Afghanistan they died at about 75
percent of all combat deaths were white
males
and yet they only made up 35 percent of
the population so here were Millie and
Austin
suggesting that they were going to be
proportional on every aspect of the
military or a Repertory in fact except
they never mentioned the data on the
combat dead and so that they essentially
have done in the space of just about a
year and a half they've told all of
these families
even though you send your even though
you went to Vietnam and even though your
son went to the first Gulf War and even
though it's a family tradition that you
fought your grandson fought in
Afghanistan now your great-grandson is
going to turn 18. we still suspect that
you suffer from White rage
and even though you died at Double the
numbers of your Rubik we're not going to
count that and you and so they've just
said we're done we're not going to join
go get somebody else from one of these
and that's happening everywhere in this
country right now is and when you it's
not just the military you can see it
with the Airlines pilot training you can
see it with medical school admissions we
used to make a joke in the United States
well they're never going to do this
where nuclear plant operators are pilots
they are yeah right yeah so I think
we're getting to a we're going to get
we're seeing a
civilizations I mean it's like that line
in Hemingways The Sun Also Rises when he
asks about bankruptcy he said how did
you become bankrupt Mike and he said
gradually and then suddenly and then
suddenly I think yeah yeah right yes
right and that's what's I think that's
what's happening with the United States
we've gone with this woke diversity
stuff and now it's it was gradual and
now it's just accelerated to the point
of suddenly and we're not seeing basic
competency in our grid and our
transportation system and our education
and so I think
and the data support that and you know
when people measure the United States uh
quality of Freedom or business
environment vis-a-b other countries
we've really we've really fallen down
and and uh let's look at the military
issue for a minute so
the American Military is very
interesting institution because it it
was it was staggeringly uh
meritocratically based and that started
more or less in World War One when the
U.S military started to use tests of
General cognitive ability to select for
officer training and the American
Military was were Pioneers in
meritocratic assessment for for decades
they did a lot of the basic research on
General cognitive ability and they're a
strictly meritocratic and there's some
really cool things about that because
one of the things it meant so black
Americans are disproportionately likely
to serve in the armed forces as well
which is quite interesting and so the
U.S has set up its its um military
system not only to be available in
Wartime but also to be a means of social
progress
um in peacetime and then that's been
part of explicit policy and so
um the military was very good at finding
kids who had some ability especially on
the officer front and who had some
competence and some diligence and then
subjecting them to a meritocratic
evaluation and and training process and
moving them up to socioeconomic
hierarchy and so it's it's it's quite
remarkable to see that and you know I
know a lot of military people and
especially at the higher ends of the
performance Spectrum they're they're
very singular type of person I mean
um one guy I know for example a Texas
Ranger I I talked to him about when he
decided he wanted to be a Texas Ranger
and he said he was like five years old
eh when he knew he wanted to do
something that was military and
specialized and he was one of these
people who he was only interested in
training if it was almost impossible
insanely rigorous and strictly
meritocratic it's actually what he was
looking for right and so one of the
problems with producing let's say a
military apparatus where you dispense
with meritocracy is you cease to attract
the very people who you absolutely want
to attract right who are unbelievably
ambitious with regards to stringent
attainment that's especially true for
the special forces and so you can
imagine that you just decimate the
military by excluding the very people
who would be likely to thrive
temperamentally and practically it's a
real catastrophe and so and you've lost
the Reagan Foundation just did a poll
last year and traditionally 75 percent
of Americans had polled they had great
confidence in the military now it's 45
and the same is true when we see this
what weaponization you know I don't need
to get into that big topic of the FBI
the CIA we're starting to see that these
institutions that we all have revered
especially on the conservative side
they've completely lost all of their
conservative traditional support and
they become almost stossy-like in their
they've been weaponized and I I feel
like so we're starting to see in the
private and the public sector everything
that worked and made the United States
singular and exceptional
suddenly I mean we can chart the the
Genesis of it goes way back decades but
suddenly it's accelerated to such a
point and whether we're talking about uh
district attorneys in Chicago or
Baltimore or San Francisco or Los
Angeles laying criminals out the day
that they commit a violent offense we're
starting to see Society unwind and what
we don't realize is this happens a lot
uh in Rome there was there was no reason
why the Western Empire had to fall in
the late 5th Century in the way that the
Byzantine Eastern house survived for a
thousand years but once you lose
confidence in these institutions and
once they're no longer bureaucratic and
once people's primary allegiances
is not any longer to the state
everything we've talked about this
morning than use the the end result is
an implosion very quickly and I think we
haven't I think well this put this is a
real conundrum for conservatives say
maybe we can start to talk about Mr
Trump here a little bit because of this
so here's the Dilemma that I see with
regards to conservatives especially on
the populist front and so
um Trump was very good at speaking to
disaffected working-class Americans and
certainly the Democrats abandoned them
completely in the hill in the Clinton
campaign and had been preparing to do
that for years like the idiot champagne
socialists have at the universities but
in any case Trump was pretty good at
talking to working class Americans but
here's the danger as far as I'm
concerned on the classically
conservative front and I don't really
know what to do about this it's like the
radical leftists have this fundamental
proposition which is all institutions
are corrupt and predicated on dominance
and power and so that's kind of their
leap Motif but now you have people like
Trump who come in as Outsiders and say
you know on the populist front hey
everyone on the right on the
conservative side we're working class
side let's say now
um
all your institutions are corrupt and
basically predicated on uh you know
dominance and power and I think well
this is a big problem because the
conservatives are objecting to the
corruption the corruption of the
institutions in the manner that you just
described they're captured by the woke
ideology but the underlying message to
people is kind of the same which is our
fundamental institutions can no longer
be trusted and the problem with beating
that drama on the conservative side as
far as I can tell is that you add fuel
to the fire on the left side and so then
you're in the position and we can talk
about the role of the humanities and
education there you're in the position
of asking yourself well if you are a
conservative and you're traditionally
based but you believe that the
institutions have been corrupt how the
hell can you plot a pathway forward
without falling prey to exaggeration of
exactly the concerns that the radical
leftists are putting forward because
they say the same thing the institutions
can't be trusted it's like the spirit of
the institutions can be Trust like that
I I would maybe differ just in two
regards one is I think they used to say
the institutions
can't be trusted but it was the left
that egged on the Russian collusion hoax
the laptop hoax the Ping and the alpha
Bank hoax
and it was a left who said that James
Clapper who lied under oath once and
John Brennan who lied under oath twice
and James Comey who famed Amnesia 245
times under oath and Andrew McCabe who
lied four times under oath and Anthony
fauci whose latest interrogatory was
just a mishmash of I can't remember I
don't recall
so and they are all iconic in the left
so the left is basically said these
institutions got so unwieldy and two
million people working for the federal
government and the regulators
uh The Regulators who were not elected
alone had the expertise of this huge
Byzantine complex because elected
officials come and go but the EPA guy is
always there and he knows every judge
jury executioner legislative judicial
uh executive power all in one person
mode of operating
that the conservative said we've got to
break this up we've got to take the FBI
office and put it in Kansas City we've
got to cut 10 percent of the workforce
we've got to make sure that uh HHS we
get uh should it shouldn't even be in
Washington we've got to get rid of the
Department of energy I remember miss Mr
Perry the Texas governor said I'm going
to get rid of three agencies
unfortunately he couldn't remember which
ones they were on the debate stage but
that's what conservatives were doing but
the left is saying well you know just as
you have lost confidence because you
they're regular over Regulatory and
they're intrusive and they are
anti-constitutional and they go after
the individual we find them now for the
first time quite attractive because in
our Davos agenda or our great reset
agenda uh whether it's mandating green
energy or mandating Equity or mandating
vaccinations we find these institutions
suddenly for the first time in our lives
very very attractive
and so they've been they've inherited
them and adopted them now and it's it's
okay okay all right so it is uncounty to
watch that I mean one of the most
miraculous things I've seen in my
lifetime is the insistence by people on
the left side of the spectrum that
pharmaceutical companies can be trusted
so that that's just like you know
everything is absolutely upside down
when that happens okay but you're now
you're pulling out something that's very
paradoxical a because on the one hand
we've already established the case that
this fundamental critique that's emerged
from the universities is a critique of
institutional reliability and the basic
Doctrine is one of powers that all
institutions are predicated on the
expression of arbitrary power and they
can't be trusted especially if you're
not in the power elite but but then you
say there's a paradoxical side of that
which is that at the same time the same
people at least with regards to their
political and philosophical orientation
are increasingly willing to utilize
large-scale social institutions to put
forward a given agenda I suppose maybe
the difference there is that the left is
perfectly willing to trust large-scale
institutions if the institutions operate
under the rubric of their ideological
Theory absolutely right so you could
make in that case or you can get rid of
all this yeah absolutely they get rid of
all the Sturm and drag of discussion and
the Congress when they take the military
over they they worship the chain of
command because whether it's
transgendered subsidized surgeries or
women in combat units they can they can
affect social change in an authoritarian
chain of command Fiat so everything that
makes these institutions
skeptical or suspicious to the
traditional supporters that they become
they've taken away the power of the
individual they are commissary like
they're ideologically weaponized by the
left all of those things make it
attractive to the left so it's it's one
of the strangest things I think in the
history of the country how the right has
backed away from all of these
investigatory agencies military they
don't they don't trust them anymore
because they've been they've been I
guess their DNA is like a virus has been
recalibrated against the individual in
traditional America and the left comes
in and says we like what they're doing
we like their overreach of civil
liberties because that's the only way
that we can affect these changes that 51
percent of the people don't want and
they because they're stupid but when you
control Silicon Valley and K-12 in
Hollywood now the military and the FBI
and the CIA and the doj now we can
finally enact change without public
support and so I don't know where it's
all going to end but the conservatives
have backed off in in that vacuum the
left is moved in so you know one of the
things I really appreciated about
reading solution's Gulag archipelago was
his insistence
that what happened in the Soviet Union
was not an aberration in relationship to
the set of ideas that made up the
Communist utopian Vision but a
fulfillment of the what would you call
it of the core content that was implicit
in the original doctrines right because
the apologists on the left constantly
and still due to this day say well real
communism has never been tried which I
think is one of the world's most
appalling excuses by the way but
independent of that the the real notion
was well a system of ideas had been
produced it had a certain degree of
internal coherence and then if you
launch that system into the world it
would run algorithmically and produce
certain outcomes and it did that in
country after country and the problem in
some sense with the discussion we're
having now is that we're not making a
distinction between the they that are
putting forward these ideas and the
algorithmic yes what would you say
impetus of the system of ideas itself
right because it's not exactly a shadowy
Cabell of conspiracists are operating
behind the scenes to bring this about
what it is is a set of ideas mostly most
of which emerged in France and Germany
and then were adopted in the United
States that have a certain ethos built
into them and the ethos is partly group
identity uh predicated right the
fundamental predicate is that the most
important distinction between people is
some element of their group identity and
then there are ideas associated with
that like all outcomes should be equal
or that's evidence of of the dominance
of something like arbitrary power and
another ethos would be the fundamental
motivating principle of the human race
is power and domination and so those
ideas have an ethos that makes itself
known across time and it it elaborates
and then it it becomes a system of ideas
that possesses individuals and then they
act in concert with the ideas but you
don't need a formal conspiracy no I
think I think you know I think just
about just I think I agree in a similar
way I think what we're witnessing now is
the end stage of
of what was wilsonian progressivism part
elements of the New Deal the Great
Society program all of which could be
justified by the left uh to address the
needs of the day and maybe to rectify
some of the rigidity of the American
system but ultimately it was built into
them that eventually it would appear in
this latest manifestation because uh it
it always on the horizon there was the
idea that we're we're marching toward
Radical egalitarianism by Fiat and that
requires a level of coercion that's
antithetical to a Democratic Society
it's and Plato's gorgeous I think
Socrates won at one point says
well
in Athens they will not be happy until
the dogs and the donkeys can vote and
what he's trying to say is that each
element of expanding the franchise
Justified as it was ultimately is going
to end into the Absurd because there's
no there's always going to be somebody
who says that he's he doesn't have the
same
franchise as someone else it's and I
think it's very similar like well that's
always the same case I think it's built
into this mindset or ideology it's once
you through out the Bourbons that was
justified then you had the
constitutional republic yes and you can
see that that was and then you had dent
on but ultimately you whether you knew
it or not you had a rendezvous with the
Jacobins just like them you had a
rendezvous with the Mao was right right
just like karensky and the minshevx had
a rendezvous with Bolshevik it was
headed that way until if somebody didn't
derail it and I think that's where we
are today okay so this allows us to
return to a theme we didn't develop
enough which is part of the purpose of a
true Humanities education is to transmit
the difficult to acquire knowledge that
actually allows people to become wise
enough to forestall that inevitable
deterioration towards an idiot and
vengeful uh egalitarianism yes right it
takes a lot of training now you know you
said you had taught ancient languages to
exam for example to minority students
and people listening might think well
what the hell good is that and let me
make a case for what good what good that
is very briefly because it's a case for
the Humanities and you can comment on
that well first of all there isn't
anything you can do to empower people
which is a word I hate more effectively
than to teach them how to be deeply
literate and historically knowledgeable
if you're looking to facilitate people's
ability to make positive changes in
their own life there is nothing you can
do that's more helpful to that than to
make them literate and if you want to
help them understand who they are in the
deepest sense over and above the
superficial attractions of tribalism
let's say you have to educate them
deeply in this historical uh uh realm
that requires the acquisition of
explicit knowledge about the central
nature of the human being and that would
be the Distinguished Citizen let's say
someone capable of of
upholding the responsibilities of a
citizen and someone worthy of the rights
that are part and parcel of that and
without a deep Humanities education all
of that disappears because it has to be
transmitted explicitly and so that was
the proper role of the universities for
years it was as I Envision it our role
was twofold that we were going to teach
a method the inductive method as opposed
to the deductive method so that people
when they looked at The Human Experience
via art or literature or history they
would look at Exempla and then they
would come to a general overriding
conclusion that took it took the
evidence rather than say I have an idea
and I'm going to cherry-pick the
evidence that was one thing that we
taught the socratic inductive medicine
the other was we had to give them some
kind of Arsenal or or realm of knowledge
or reference point so I know I used to
I used to
Xerox maybe 500 terms ionic order or
non-composed Mentos anything I could
give as an architecture and then we
everybody made fun of Multiplex we had
mostly essay tests but I always thought
there was a value in a multi uh choice
test and key dates generals I would
always say to the student when you leave
right when you leave here I want you to
know how far Sparta is from Athens I
want you to give me three reasons
quickly why the Mycenaean Empire
collapsed and it was funny because
graduate some of our students would sit
in on interviews from ivy league
professors and they would ask these
questions and these professors I should
say abds didn't have the any answers for
them they had no practical knowledge and
then one student said to me well why are
we doing this and I said well it's so
that you don't have to repeat every life
every life experience that you have
you're going to learn what is wise and
stupid by experience and often that
experience is going to be deleterious to
your character your fortune but you
don't have to you're fatal yeah you
don't have to do that all the time if
you think that
sometimes people who are right or
punished are the more moral a person is
the more that he's hated it's not you
alone that experiences that you can you
don't have to you can find comfort and
Antigone or if you can say the racial is
not to the Swift then why and how the
students came in and he said you know
what I'm the best tackle on the team but
I never get a chance to play because I
don't kiss up and I said then you're old
Ajax
and what are you going to do about but
that's the Dilemma of Ajax and the sofa
glim play so that was some of some of
the things that are more pragmatic since
the humanities were able to do they were
able to give a person a whole reference
of knowledge so that they didn't have to
live out and learn something by wrote or
by they had an example and the other
thing is it gave them a sense of yeah
well not Beauty that's not that's not
optional that's not optional for human
beings I mean we are linguistic
creatures and we require an awful lot of
cultural programs I think and every
culture knows that and so you you
definitely you were definitely in this
situation where if we don't inculcate
the wisdom of the past into our young
people then they are forced to
regenerate that wisdom through painful
and often fatal experience those are the
options and to study history in the
humanities is to arm yourself against
the Sea of troubles and to become
literate and the and that is the core of
the universities and the universities
have definite gently abandoned that in
the favor of this idiot narrative you
know here's something you might find
interesting so I did a research study
with one of my students just before I
was basically you know kicked out of the
university for being persona non Gratis
and uh we we investigated two uh
Mysteries the first was was there a
coherent set of beliefs that you could
describe as politically correct and the
way we investigated that was to produce
a very large body of political
statements and then to find out the
degree to which people agreed with them
and then to analyze them statistically
to see if there were patterns of belief
and we found two patterns of belief that
were obviously
commensurate with the notion of a
politically correct set of beliefs and
one of them was like a politically
correct liberalism and the other was
politically correct authoritarianism and
there's been quite a bit of research on
the psychological front with regards to
politically correct authoritarianism in
recent years so first of all there is
such a thing as politically correct
beliefs and there's an authoritarian
version but then you might also ask
yourself what predicts whether or not
people will believe these theories
you know what the biggest predictor was
this is so horrible
it was low verbal intelligence
it was more it was more it was a bigger
predictor than
than verbal intelligence is a predictor
of grades or socioeconomic outcome
it was 0.45 a correlation whose
magnitude you never get in the social
science study a walloping effect and
then the subsidiary predictors were well
being female was one of them being
agreeable in temperament which is a
feminine personality temperament and
then having taken any courses that were
essentially propagandistic in nature and
so part of the reason that people fall
fall for these this simplistic set of
ideas is because
well they are simple and they they
they're very attractive to people who
want or require a uni-dimensional view
of the world
at in light of both of its Simplicity
let's say but also its underlying
proclivity also to identify a convenient
enemy I think that's true I I had a
student I I I mentioned it in the dying
citizen but I had a student who once
said to me well you know this country is
very unfair because Wyoming
has one Senator I think at the time it
was for two hundred thousand 400 000
residents and California at that time we
were 30 million now it's 41 but we have
to have 15 million people we only get
one Senator and I said now why would
that be
and he said because the founders were
not Democratic I said yes but why
weren't they fully Democratic and do you
have the house was going to be elected
every the whole house flips every two
years it represents 750 000 people so it
is democratic but it's balanced by the
Senate that flips every
three year I mean one-third only flips
every two years you have to be older it
uh it represents States it it's the it's
America as defined by the individual 50
states not the people that's the house
and this then is balanced by the
executive and the person was so arrogant
because he was so ignorant but he had
got this catchphrase in his mind that
democ America is a democracy and
therefore this sentence not Democratic
and then
so I was very interested in this and so
I went when I was doing the I didn't
realize there was a whole body of
scholarly literature attacking the
Senate from law schools and from
political science departments the Senate
is sort of the the last Target of the
left they're trying to change it there
there's a whole
body of research showing just how toxic
and conservative and anti-liberal it is
because it doesn't represent people it
represents States and that the
representatives in some States senators
in some states have larger
constituencies in Senate and the other
and the Supreme Court has already ruled
one man one vote as it pertains to house
districts and therefore it must rule
that the Senate uh each Senator must be
proportionally equal
yeah well you know it it's not that look
you can see that the idea of a
distributed democracy has an
instantaneous intuitive appeal it takes
a lot of sophisticated thinking before
you can understand that there have to be
intermediary institutions right and part
of the purpose of a Humanities education
was to give people that wisdom say look
the problem with radical democracy is
that it can degenerate into rule by the
mob like impulsive rule by the mob and
that's the danger of populism for
example of an untram so you need
intermediary institutions you can kill
Socrates they have to be set up vote to
kill Socrates by a majority vote on the
court or you can vote to kill all the
middle Indians on Monday and then decide
the next day you don't want to do it and
send a ship after the first try ream
because the entire assembly is flipped
in 24 hours from being murderous to
similar murderous and that was what our
Founders knew that it was very dangerous
but that knowledge is completely
absent in this younger generation
because they're the the sources of that
transmission in history departments or
political science departments or
government is not there anymore and it's
not there at K-12 there is no civic
education anymore there's no body of
music and art and tradition and
literature and poetry that each do their
part to make a citizen aware of how
unique the system was and so that's what
I find really frightening is this
Collective Amnesia in this generation as
this generation especially uh it's it's
it took a long time but this generation
is the first that I've been aware of
that is completely Amnesia about
the past it it hates the past it it
feels that history is melodrama
yeah those who forget the pastor doomed
to repeat it and so that was the role of
the University so look we've we've used
up our 90 minutes of time here on
YouTube we didn't get to talk about
Donald Trump too much but maybe we'll
have an opportunity to do that again in
the future we did Cover a fair bit of
territory in relationship to the idea of
citizenship and the role of the
universities and so I think that was
useful and apt and I do believe that you
know there are Stellar opportunities on
the educational front at the moment as
the responsibility for proper education
is abdicated by the universities there's
an economic opportunity and a conceptual
opportunity and you know the U.S is a
pretty damn Dynamic place on the
entrepreneurial front and it certainly
might be the case that new institutions
will arise to fill the void that's left
by the universities as they collapse and
it might be that places like Hillsdale
are on the Forefront of that we'll see
if that happens
um thank you very much for agreeing to
talk to me today and to all of you who
are watching listening on YouTube and
Associated podcasts I'm going to talk to
Dr Hansen for another half an hour on
the daily wire plus platform I like to
delve into people's biographies to see
how their career got its start and how
it developed across time and so we'll
delve into that and it's pleasure
meeting you sir and thank you very much
for agreeing to talk to me and to
everyone else today and uh Happy New
Year to you and we'll flip over to the
Daily wire plus side goodbye everybody
who's watching and listening
hello everyone I would encourage you to
continue listening to my conversation
with my guest on dailywireplus.com